arlib/llm/abduct/README.rst, before:

LLM-based Abduction with SMT Validation
=====================================

This module provides a framework for evaluating Large Language Models (LLMs) on abductive inference tasks with SMT constraints validation, using ZhipuAI as the LLM provider and Z3 for validation.

Overview
--------

The framework implements abductive reasoning using LLMs, where:

1. The **premise** and **conclusion** are given as SMT constraints
2. The LLM is tasked with generating a hypothesis that explains how the conclusion follows from the premise
3. The generated hypothesis is validated using Z3 to check for correctness

Abductive reasoning follows this pattern:
- Given: Premises (Γ) and a desired conclusion (φ)
- Find: A hypothesis (ψ) such that:
  - Γ ∧ ψ is satisfiable (consistency)
  - Γ ∧ ψ |= φ (sufficiency to imply the conclusion)

Components
---------

The framework consists of the following key components:

- **LLMAbductor**: Uses LLMs to generate abductive hypotheses for given SMT constraints
- **AbductionProblem**: Represents an abduction problem with SMT constraints
- **AbductionEvaluator**: Evaluates LLM performance on abduction tasks

Installation
-----------

Install the required dependencies:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install z3-solver numpy python-dotenv zhipuai

Setup
-----

Configuration is managed via environment variables. Create a ``.env`` file in your project directory:

.. code-block:: text

    ZHIPU_API_KEY=your_zhipu_api_key

Usage
-----

Run Demo
~~~~~~~~

The easiest way to get started is to run the demo script, which uses ZhipuAI to solve example abduction problems:

.. code-block:: bash

    python demo.py

API Usage Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: python

    from arlib.llm.abduct import AbductionProblem, LLMAbductor
    from arlib.llm.abduct.zhipu import ZhipuLLM
    import z3

    # Create a problem
    x, y = z3.Ints('x y')
    premise = z3.And(x >= 0, y >= 0)
    conclusion = x + y <= 10
    problem = AbductionProblem(
        premise=premise,
        conclusion=conclusion,
        description="Find conditions that ensure the sum is at most 10",
        variables=[x, y]
    )

    # Initialize LLM and abductor
    llm = ZhipuLLM(model_name="glm-4-flash")
    abductor = LLMAbductor(llm=llm)

    # Generate abduction
    result = abductor.abduce(problem)

    # Check results
    print(f"Hypothesis: {result.hypothesis}")
    print(f"Consistent: {result.is_consistent}")
    print(f"Sufficient: {result.is_sufficient}")
    print(f"Valid: {result.is_valid}")

Evaluation
~~~~~~~~~

You can evaluate the LLM on a list of problems and save the results:

.. code-block:: python

    from arlib.llm.abduct import AbductionEvaluator

    # problems = [...]  # List of AbductionProblem
    # abductor = ...    # An instance of LLMAbductor

    evaluator = AbductionEvaluator(abductor, problems)
    metrics = evaluator.evaluate()
    print(metrics)
    evaluator.save_results("results.json")

LLM Support
----------

Currently supported LLM provider:

- **Zhipu AI**: Chinese LLM provider with models like GLM-4. Only ZhipuAI is supported out of the box.

Extending the Framework
---------------------

Adding New LLM Providers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To add a new provider, subclass the ``LLM`` base class in ``base.py``:

.. code-block:: python

    from arlib.llm.abduct.base import LLM

    class MyCustomLLM(LLM):
        def __init__(self, model_name, **kwargs):
            # Initialize your LLM client
            pass
            
        def generate(self, prompt, temperature=0.7, max_tokens=None, stop=None, **kwargs):
            # Implement generation logic
            pass
            
        def get_embedding(self, text, **kwargs):
            # Implement embedding logic
            pass

Notes
-----

- Only ZhipuAI is supported in the current implementation.
- Example problems and usage are provided in ``demo.py``.
- There are **no built-in benchmark generation functions** in this module.
- For custom benchmarks, define your own list of ``AbductionProblem`` instances.

Commit message:

Refactor LLM integration and enhance abduction framework
- Introduced `LLMViaTool` class to streamline LLM interactions via `arlib.llm.llmtool`, replacing the previous `ZhipuLLM` implementation.
- Updated `AbductionEvaluator` and `LLMAbductor` to utilize the new LLM class for improved flexibility and support for multiple LLM providers.
- Refactored demo script to demonstrate the new LLM integration, showcasing example abduction problems.
- Enhanced README documentation to reflect changes in LLM support and usage instructions.
- Removed the outdated `zhipu.py` file as it is no longer necessary.

arlib/llm/abduct/README.rst, after:

LLM-based Abduction with SMT Validation
=====================================

This module provides a framework for evaluating Large Language Models (LLMs) on abductive inference tasks with SMT constraints validation. It reuses the centralized `arlib.llm.llmtool` for querying LLMs (OpenAI, Claude, DeepSeek, Gemini, GLM) and Z3 for validation.

Overview
--------

The framework implements abductive reasoning using LLMs, where:

1. The **premise** and **conclusion** are given as SMT constraints
2. The LLM is tasked with generating a hypothesis that explains how the conclusion follows from the premise
3. The generated hypothesis is validated using Z3 to check for correctness

Abductive reasoning follows this pattern:
- Given: Premises (Γ) and a desired conclusion (φ)
- Find: A hypothesis (ψ) such that:
  - Γ ∧ ψ is satisfiable (consistency)
  - Γ ∧ ψ |= φ (sufficiency to imply the conclusion)

Components
---------

The framework consists of the following key components:

- **LLMAbductor**: Uses LLMs to generate abductive hypotheses for given SMT constraints
- **AbductionProblem**: Represents an abduction problem with SMT constraints
- **AbductionEvaluator**: Evaluates LLM performance on abduction tasks

Installation
-----------

Install the required dependencies:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install z3-solver numpy python-dotenv openai anthropic boto3 google-generativeai zhipuai

Setup
-----

Configuration is managed via environment variables. Create a ``.env`` file in your project directory (set the keys you need):

.. code-block:: text

    OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-...:org
    DEEPSEEK_API_KEY2=...
    ZHIPU_API_KEY=...

Usage
-----

Run Demo
~~~~~~~~

The easiest way to get started is to run the demo script, which uses `llmtool` routing (e.g., GLM) to solve example abduction problems:

.. code-block:: bash

    python demo.py

API Usage Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: python

    from arlib.llm.abduct import AbductionProblem, LLMAbductor
    from arlib.llm.abduct.base import LLMViaTool
    import z3

    # Create a problem
    x, y = z3.Ints('x y')
    premise = z3.And(x >= 0, y >= 0)
    conclusion = x + y <= 10
    problem = AbductionProblem(
        premise=premise,
        conclusion=conclusion,
        description="Find conditions that ensure the sum is at most 10",
        variables=[x, y]
    )

    # Initialize LLM and abductor
    llm = LLMViaTool(model_name="glm-4-flash")  # or gpt-4o, claude-3.5-sonnet, deepseek-chat, gemini-1.5, etc.
    abductor = LLMAbductor(llm=llm)

    # Generate abduction
    result = abductor.abduce(problem)

    # Check results
    print(f"Hypothesis: {result.hypothesis}")
    print(f"Consistent: {result.is_consistent}")
    print(f"Sufficient: {result.is_sufficient}")
    print(f"Valid: {result.is_valid}")

Evaluation
~~~~~~~~~

You can evaluate the LLM on a list of problems and save the results:

.. code-block:: python

    from arlib.llm.abduct import AbductionEvaluator

    # problems = [...]  # List of AbductionProblem
    # abductor = ...    # An instance of LLMAbductor

    evaluator = AbductionEvaluator(abductor, problems)
    metrics = evaluator.evaluate()
    print(metrics)
    evaluator.save_results("results.json")

LLM Support
----------

Currently supported providers via `llmtool`:

- **OpenAI** (gpt-4*, o3-mini)
- **Anthropic Claude** (via Bedrock)
- **DeepSeek**
- **Google Gemini**
- **Zhipu/GLM**

Extending the Framework
---------------------

Adding New LLM Providers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To customize, you can subclass the ``LLM`` base class in ``base.py`` or extend `llmtool` routing:

.. code-block:: python

    from arlib.llm.abduct.base import LLM

    class MyCustomLLM(LLM):
        def __init__(self, model_name, **kwargs):
            # Initialize your LLM client
            pass

        def generate(self, prompt, temperature=0.7, max_tokens=None, stop=None, **kwargs):
            # Implement generation logic
            pass

        def get_embedding(self, text, **kwargs):
            # Implement embedding logic
            pass

Notes
-----

- Only ZhipuAI is supported in the current implementation.
- Example problems and usage are provided in ``demo.py``.
- There are **no built-in benchmark generation functions** in this module.
- For custom benchmarks, define your own list of ``AbductionProblem`` instances.
